GWEN IFILL: Good
evening. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the
"NewsHour" tonight:
REP. TREY GOWDY (R), South
Carolina: Madam Secretary, I
understand there are people,
frankly, in both parties who
have suggested that this
investigation is about you. Let
me assure you, it is not.
GWEN IFILL: Hillary Clinton in
the hot seat. House Republicans
grill the former secretary
of state for hours on the
Benghazi attack that killed four
Americans and sparked a
17-month-long
investigation.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: There
was never a recommendation from
any
intelligence official in our
government, from any official in
the State Department, or from
any other person with knowledge
of our presence in Benghazi to
shut down Benghazi.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Thursday: A priest in Mexico
offers a place of refuge
along a perilous
journey to the U.S.
GWEN IFILL: And a beer maker's
secret recipe for success,
letting employees own the
company.
WOMAN: The better I do, the
better we do. It really does
inspire us all to go above
and beyond in a way that I
haven't experienced at other
employers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Republican Paul
Ryan now appears all but certain
to run for and be elected
speaker of the House
of Representatives.
The Wisconsin lawmaker won
support in his own party today
from key moderates, from
mainstream
conservatives, and from a group
of fiscal conservative that
opposed the current House
speaker, John Boehner. Ryan
cleared an even bigger hurdle
last night, when most of the
harder-line conservatives in the
so-called Freedom Caucus voted
to support him. The House
will choose its
speaker next week.
GWEN IFILL: President Obama
vetoed a sweeping $600 billion
defense bill today. In an Oval
Office ceremony, he took issue
with increasing war spending by
going around budget caps set
by the so-called sequester.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: I have repeatedly
called on Congress to eliminate
the sequester and make sure that
we are providing certainty to
our military, so they can do
out-year planning, ensure
military readiness, ensure our
troops are getting what they
need.
This bill instead resorts to
gimmicks that does not allow the
Pentagon to do what it
needs to do.
GWEN IFILL: Republicans are
considered unlikely to muster
the votes needed to override the
veto.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary of
State John Kerry voiced cautious
optimism today about ending
a spate of Israeli-Palestinian
violence. He met with Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu
for four hours, as both men
visited Berlin, Germany, and he
spoke to reporters afterward.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: There may be some things
that could be, in the next
couple of days, put on the table
which would have an impact, I
hope, on the perceptions
of everybody engaged that there
is a way to defuse the situation
and begin to find a way
forward.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kerry called for
an end to incitement, without
singling out either side.
He plans to meet with
Palestinian Prime Minister
Mahmoud Abbas in Jordan on
Saturday.
Meanwhile, there was fresh
violence in Jerusalem. Two
Palestinians wounded a Jewish
man in a
stabbing attack. Police killed
one of the assailants and
wounded the other.
GWEN IFILL: The people of Sweden
were stunned today by a savage
attack on a school. It happened
in the southern part of the
country, where a masked man
fatally stabbed two people,
before
he was killed himself.
Cordelia Lynch of Independent
Television News filed this
report.
CORDELIA LYNCH: Clad in black,
wearing a metal helmet, wielding
a sword, while casually posing
with students unaware of the
malice behind the mask. They
assumed he was dressed up for
Halloween, but it's believed
moments after this photo was
taken, he attacked and killed
a teacher and pupil,
injuring two others.
Police were called to Kronan
School in Trollhattan, north of
Gothenburg, shortly after 10:00
this
morning. They said the 21-year
old attacker knocked on the
doors of two classrooms and
targeted those who opened them.
After shooting the attacker
dead, police searched his home
and recovered what they called
interesting items. They are now
looking into possible
far-right sympathies.
But what led up to the rampage
is still unclear. It is, the
prime minister said, a dark day
for Sweden.
STEFAN LOFVEN, Swedish Prime
Minister (through translator):
That which should never happen
has happened here today, and
this is why this is a tragedy
that affects the whole country.
CORDELIA LYNCH: The town has a
large immigrant population and
this was an ethically diverse
school. The killer lived
locally. The fact he was
seemingly able to enter so
easily,
though, has prompted calls for
much tighter security across the
country.
GWEN IFILL: The last such attack
on a school in Sweden was in
1961.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Russian
military has announced plans to
build a base in an island group
that's
partly claimed by Japan. The
islands, known as the Kurils,
are located just miles off
the Japanese mainland. The
Soviet Union seized the chain at
the end of World War II. As a
result, Japan never signed a
formal peace treaty with Moscow.
GWEN IFILL: In economic news,
the United Auto Workers union
approved a new four-year
contract
with Fiat Chrysler, after
rejecting an earlier version.
And Wall Street got a big boost
from upbeat reports by
McDonald's and eBay. The Dow
Jones
industrial average gained 320
points to close near 17490. The
Nasdaq rose almost 80 points,
and the S&P 500 added 33.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And from now on,
a round of golf could mean a
term in jail for members
of China's Communist Party. New
rules have banned all 88 million
party members from playing
golf, in a crackdown on
corruption and high-living. The
party's anti-corruption office
says that
golf courses are where illegal
deals get done, and where
officials spend time playing
instead
of working.
GWEN IFILL: I know some people
not going to China now.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Still to come on the
"NewsHour": a marathon hearing
on Benghazi; how a beer
maker raises the stakes on
employee performance; finding
sanctuary on the dangerous
journey
to the U.S., and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hillary Clinton
returned to Capitol Hill today
to defend her actions as
secretary of state during the
2012 attack on a diplomatic
outpost in Libya.
The Republican-led Select
Committee on Benghazi is
investigating the attack on a
U.S. Consulate,
which left four Americans dead,
including Ambassador Chris
Stevens.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins reports on the
contentious hearing.
LISA DESJARDINS: It was a
full-blown Capitol Hill
spectacle, with one of the
longest lines
in recent years, and reporters
crushing forward to try to get
inside.
Republican Committee Chairman
Trey Gowdy began by defending
the Benghazi investigation.
REP. TREY GOWDY (R), South
Carolina: Madam Secretary, not a
single member of this committee
signed up to investigate you or
your e-mail. We signed up to
investigate, and therefore
honor, the lives of four people
that we sent into a dangerous
country to represent us,
and to do everything we can to
prevent it from happening to
others.
LISA DESJARDINS: Former
Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton in turn started with a
slow,
deliberate tone.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: As
secretary of state, I had the
honor to
lead and the responsibility to
support nearly 70,000 diplomats
and development experts across
the globe.
Losing any one of them, as we
did in Iraq, Afghanistan,
Mexico, Haiti, and Libya, during
my tenure was deeply painful for
our entire State Department and
USAID family and for
me personally. I traveled to 112
countries as secretary of state.
Every time I did, I
felt great pride and honor
representing the country that I
love.
LISA DESJARDINS: Soon, though,
Republican Susan Brooks of
Indiana launched what would
become a theme: Was Clinton
paying enough attention to
Benghazi? Brooks pointed to a
small stack of Clinton's
Benghazi e-mails the year of the
attack, 2012, and a larger
one from the year before.
REP. SUSAN BROOKS (R), Indiana:
There are 795 e-mails in this
pile. We have counted
them. There's 67 e-mails
in this pile in 2012.
And I'm troubled by what I see
here. In this pile in 2011, I
see daily updates, sometimes
hourly updates from your staff
about Benghazi and Chris
Stevens.
When I look at this pile in
2012, I only see a handful of
e-mails to you from your senior
staff about Benghazi. And let me
just share for you in your
records that we have reviewed,
there is not one e-mail to you
or from you in 2012 when an
explosive device went off
at our compound in April.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Well,
Congresswoman, I didn't conduct
most of the business that
I did on behalf of our country
on e-mail. I conducted it in
meetings.
I read massive amounts of memos,
a great deal of classified
information. I made a lot of
secure phone calls. I was in and
out of the White House all the
time. There were a lot
of things that happened that I
was aware of and that I was
reacting to.
If you were to be in my office
in the State Department, I
didn't have a computer. I didn't
do the vast majority
of my work on e-mail.
LISA DESJARDINS: But another
Republican, Georgia's Lynn
Westmoreland, wasn't satisfied
with Clinton's
defense.
REP. LYNN WESTMORELAND (R),
Georgia: You knew about these
two incidents that have been
mentioned
previously. It's not a matter if
you knew about them. It's a
matter of what you did
about them. And, to us, the
answer to that is nothing.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: The
experts, who I have the greatest
confidence in, and who have
been through so many difficult
positions, because practically
all of them had rotated
through Afghanistan, Pakistan,
Iraq, Yemen, other places, they
were the ones making the
assessment. No one ever came to
me and said, we should shut down
our compound in Benghazi.
REP. LYNN WESTMORELAND: I'm not
saying I'm not saying shut it
down. I'm just saying protect
it.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Right.
LISA DESJARDINS: Republican Jim
Jordan of Ohio pushed on whether
Clinton knew the attack
was planned by terrorists, but
still allowed official U.S.
statements to claim it was a
spontaneous anti-American mob.
REP. JIM JORDAN (R), Ohio: Why
didn't you just speak plain to
the American people?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: I did
state clearly and I said it
again in more detail the next
morning, as did the president.
I'm sorry that it doesn't fit
your narrative, Congressman.
I can only tell you
what the facts were.
LISA DESJARDINS: Clinton's
fellow Democrats sounded their
own theme, arguing that she's
the victim of a partisan
political witch-hunt.
REP. ADAM SMITH (D), Washington:
Even today's hearing, not a
single solitary thing that
hasn't already been discussed
repeatedly. So we have learned
absolutely nothing. The
question is, have we found
anything substantively that
tells us something different
about what
happened in Benghazi? And the
answer to that question is no.
LISA DESJARDINS: The partisan
tension bubbled over, as
Republicans repeatedly asked
about
e-mails about Libya from
longtime Clinton friend and
previous committee witness
Sidney
Blumenthal.
REP. ELIJAH CUMMINGS (D),
Maryland: Will the gentleman
yield? Will the gentleman yield?
LISA DESJARDINS: Ranking
Democrat Elijah Cummings broke
in to accuse Chairman Gowdy of
distorting
information.
REP. ELIJAH CUMMINGS: These
facts directly contradict the
statements you made on national
television this past Sunday.
REP. TREY GOWDY: No, that's --
no, sir, with all due respect,
they do not. With that, we're
adjourned.
LISA DESJARDINS: In the end,
this longest hearing yet on the
Benghazi attacks may not
have done much to satisfy either
party. The committee aims to
finish its investigation
by January.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Lisa Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At this moment,
that hearing is still going on.
And we take a closer look,
though, at the day's events so
far with Anne Gearan, national
correspondent with The
Washington Post, and Yochi
Dreazen, managing editor of
"Foreign
Policy" magazine. I spoke with
them just a short time ago.
And, Anne Gearan, Yochi Dreazen,
thank you both for being here.
You both have covered this
story, this Benghazi story, for
so long.
So, Yochi, listening to today,
what is it that this special
committee was trying to
do?
YOCHI DREAZEN, "Foreign Policy":
Genuinely, I think there was
some truth to what Kevin
McCarthy said, the old joke
about how a gaffe in Washington
is when you actually tell the
truth.
And he lost his speakership,
arguably, by saying that this
committee was trying to damage
Hillary Clinton politically. And
if you were watching the hearing
today, you're not hearing
anything new. These questions
have been asked again and again.
The answers were given again
and again.
Basically, what you saw almost
from the beginning were
Democrats and Republicans
literally yelling
at each other. This wasn't like
an august hearing designed to
try to get down to something
we didn't know. This was
politics, pure and simple.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Anne Gearan,
though, was the committee,
though, trying to make it --
trying
to make the point that Hillary
Clinton was responsible for the
decision that left this
outpost in Libya unprotected,
and that led to the death of the
ambassador and three others?
ANNE GEARAN, The Washington
Post: Yes, absolutely.
I mean, the Republicans went at
it several different ways, but
their basic goal in that
line of questioning was to try
to establish a link between
Hillary Clinton as the secretary
of state and decisions that were
made in the bureaucracy that
either could have contributed
or could have ameliorated
what happened in Benghazi.
And, again, as Yochi said, this
is something that has been
explored really ad nauseam
before,
and her answer was really pretty
simple, which is, look, I was
the secretary of state. I
wasn't going to be down in the
weeds of a lot of these security
decisions, and I wouldn't
presume to tell professionals
whose job it is to make those
decisions exactly how to
do their jobs.
And she really tried to turn the
table on Republicans in a couple
of places, including
by pointing out that it's the
same diplomatic security agents
who protect them when they
are overseas on CODEL trips and
that -- making the point sort
of, you know, subtly that,
like, hey, would you want
somebody else telling them what
to do?
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Yochi
Dreazen, did we learn anything
more about how she made -- how
those decisions were made and
her role in what finally
happened?
YOCHI DREAZEN: I think the most
interesting moment by far was
when Congressman Jim Jordan
was saying to her, in some
detail, that you, Secretary
Clinton, told your family in one
e-mail that this was an attack
linked by al-Qaida, that you
said in a phone call with an
Egyptian
leader that this was not
something tied to an anti-Muslim
video, and then saying, but
the talking points coming out of
the White House at the time
were, this wasn't al-Qaida
and this was linked
to this video.
I thought that was the most
effective and sort of new moment
in the entire line of
questioning.
And her answer back wasn't
terribly strong. Her answer back
was, they were still sifting
intelligence. We were trying to
sort our way through it. But she
couldn't quite give the
direct answer why she was saying
in an e-mail something very
different than what was being
said publicly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, for the
audience, why does it matter?
Why did that -- why does it
matter whether she was saying
one thing? Because she tried to
say, well, I was trying to warn
other countries. We didn't want
to see this thing happening
anyplace else.
YOCHI DREAZEN: So, the
Republican charges basically are
two parts.
One is, she ignored security,
so, substantively, she could
have done more to make the
compound
safer, and then much more
damaging from their point of
view is that the White House
basically
lied. They're saying the White
House knew one thing, for
political reasons, they said
something else, and there's a
cover-up, and she was a major
part of that cover-up.
That's basically what they have
been trying to say now for three
years, that she deliberately
misstated what she knew to be
the cause of the attack, and
these e-mails were their best
attempt today to try to
make that point again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Anne Gearan, you
know, the Hillary Clinton
campaign right now, they
obviously
had some worry going into this
hearing. What was their
strategy?
ANNE GEARAN: Well, yes, there
was some concern. Benghazi
remains the largest black mark
on
her time as secretary of state,
and her time as secretary of
state is one of her main resume
points in seeking the
2016 presidential.
So, for sure, this is a big
hurdle they had to get over. Her
campaign is chiefly concerned
that there might be some moment
where, you know, who knows,
maybe the Republicans do
have some ace in the hole they
could pull out and surprise her
with, something that
she wouldn't be able to answer.
Failing that, there's a general
concern that there could be some
replay of the kind of
emotional display she had the
last time she answered questions
about Benghazi on Capitol
Hill, when she famously waved
her arms and said, what
difference at this point does it
make?
She made the point that she was
making back then today a couple
of times, but in a much
more nuanced way, and that point
basically is that it doesn't
matter in terms of what
happened in the death of four
people whether this was a
premeditated terrorist attack or
a spontaneous event that grew
out of a street protest.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
ANNE GEARAN: And that's the crux
of the issue about whether the
White House was covering
up the true origins
of the attack.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Yochi
Dreazen, what comes out of this?
Where does this lead? I mean,
after she has testified, the
committee goes on. What do they
do with this information?
YOCHI DREAZEN: So, some of the
numbers just on the hearings,
it's astounding. This is
the 21st hearing on Benghazi. By
comparison, there were 22 public
hearings on 9/11.
So, just to compare the two, 22
on 9/11, 21 on Benghazi. The
investigations are thought
to have cost about $5 million.
This has been going on now 17
months. It's not clear to
me or I think to really any
observer what is new that could
still be found.
They have already pulled out
that there are things said
publicly different from what
were
said privately, that there were
security failures. That has all
been out for quite some time.
But there was one moment that I
thought was very interesting.
She said back at one point
to them that the response to
this shouldn't be that
Washington decides, Democrat or
Republican,
that diplomacy is too dangerous,
that it shouldn't be something
where America pulls out of
dangerous
places because of
attacks like this.
And I think that, ultimately, in
some ways, is the danger. Set
aside the politics, and
if America decides we will not
send diplomats into dangerous
places, that's the lasting
impact of Benghazi.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, as we
speak, the hearing is still
going on. And we will continue
to
look at it.
For now, though, we want to
thank you both, Yochi Dreazen
and Anne Gearan. We appreciate
it.
YOCHI DREAZEN: Thanks, Judy.
ANNE GEARAN: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: For the first time
since 2011, an American soldier
has been killed in Iraq.
It happened this morning during
a rescue mission at an Islamic
State prison.
According to the Pentagon,
American and Kurdish commandos
raided the site in Northern
Iraq,
freeing 70 captives, including
more than 20 from Iraqi security
forces. Five I.S. fighters
were captured and
several were killed.
Reporter Michael Gordon is in
Iraq covering this story for The
New York Times. I spoke
with him a short time ago.
So, Michael, tell us about what
the importance was of this
strike.
MICHAEL GORDON, Diplomatic
Correspondent, The New York
Times: Well, it was important
in a number of -- for
a number of reasons.
First of all, it was a rescue
operation, and a fairly daring
one that involved American
special operations forces,
including Delta Force, and
Kurdish special operations
forces
brought to the scene by American
helicopters. So, it was a very
kind of proactive operation.
But, also, it was really the
first time that we know of in
which American advisers have
accompanied Iraqi or Kurdish
forces onto the battlefield. I
mean, up until now, they have
been advising and training them,
but only within the confines of
training areas and
bases. This time, they were
advising them in a support role,
but they were on the battlefield
with them as well.
GWEN IFILL: Who were the
70 hostages? Who are they?
MICHAEL GORDON: Well, we don't
know precisely, but it was the
-- clearly, the Americans and
the Kurds thought there were
some Peshmerga fighters there
who they were trying to rescue,
and they thought there were,
perhaps, 20 people there. When
they got there, there were about
70, and they included Iraqi
special -- Iraqi security
forces, but not Peshmerga.
They included some local
citizens of Hawija who have been
incarcerated by the Islamic
State, and perhaps some people
the Islamic State suspected as
traitors in their ranks.
But we don't really know who all
of these 69 people are. The
Kurds are still sorting
through them.
GWEN IFILL: Was this strike
designed to and did it achieve
significantly degrading ISIL,
the Islamic State forces in
that area of Northern Iraq?
MICHAEL GORDON: Well, it was a
rescue operation. It was --
they, you know -- perhaps 20 or
so militants were killed,
depending on whose figures you
can believe. But the point was
-- the aim of the operation was
to rescue the people who were
being held in a building
in Hawija, and who were
under threat of execution.
And there was -- there have been
a number of atrocities there in
recent days. Here in
the New York Times bureau, we
had a report a few days ago how
11 young people had been
hung and strung up on a bridge
to -- retribution against their
parents who are associated with
the Iraqi security forces. So
this was first and foremost a
rescue operation.
GWEN IFILL: You mentioned,
Michael, earlier that there was
significant U.S. involvement
in this rescue mission. What
does this tell us about the
state of the Iraqi Peshmerga
forces who are involved?
MICHAEL GORDON: Well, these
Kurdish forces are usually
pretty capable. These would have
been the high-end
commando forces.
So, on the one hand, it tells
you that the Americans have
enough confidence in them that
they would join them in a rescue
operation in enemy territory.
This was a very -- Islamic
State stronghold, and so that
they would have that -- a
certain agree of confidence in
them.
You know, clearly, the Kurds are
not at the point where they can
do these things entirely
on their own, and -- but that's
really not surprising. I think
the raid is really going
to perhaps energize the debate
in the United States over the
American military role in
the Middle East.
I mean, a lot of critics say
that if we're going to make
headway against the Islamic
State and roll them back, we're
probably going to have to do
more than just have advisers
that stay within the
confines of military bases.
Even General Dempsey when he was
chairman of the Joint Chiefs
said there might come
a point when he would recommend
that advisers accompany Iraqi
forces, if, for example, the
coalition was going to try to
evict the Islamic State from
Mosul. The critics, on the other
hand, are going to cite this as
an example of mission creep,
because here you had advisers,
and one was killed.
It's the first American who was
killed, died of his wounds,
since American forces returned
here after 2011. So, I think the
raid is going to have a lot of
significance for the debate
in the United States about our
role here, perhaps, and that may
be sort of its larger
significance in terms of
American policy in the region.
GWEN IFILL: And it certainly
will be a continuing debate, and
not one that's ever flagged.
Michael Gordon for The New York
Times tonight in Baghdad, thank
you very much.
MICHAEL GORDON:
Right. Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
migrants find rest 200 miles
from the U.S. border; lessons
learned from the housing crisis;
and a stray bullet that changed
a young girl's life.
But, first, let's look at an
unusual way of running a
business, by having your
employees
own the company. One popular
craft brewery has made a name
for itself in part by going
that route, with
strong results so far.
Economics correspondent Paul
Solman has the story. It's part
of our weekly series Making
Sense, which airs every
Thursday on the "NewsHour."
PAUL SOLMAN: New Belgium
Brewing, known for its quirky
culture and Fat Tire, its
Belgian
brew. This is its notorious Tour
de Fat, a beer-financed
travel-fest pushing bicycles
over cars.
At company headquarters in Fort
Collins, Colorado, co-founder
Kim Jordan loves to show off the
suds themselves.
KIM JORDAN, Co-Founder, New
Belgium Brewing: Should I show
you how to do the perfect pour?
PAUL SOLMAN: The
perfect pour, yes.
KIM JORDAN: OK.
PAUL SOLMAN: A little bit out.
Whoops. Oh, I -- no, no, I
screwed it up already.
KIM JORDAN: Yes. Yes.
PAUL SOLMAN: Oh, this
is a perfectly...
KIM JORDAN: Yes. Well...
PAUL SOLMAN: This is a
perfectly horrible pour.
But what drew us here wasn't the
beer, though New Belgium now
sells 4 percent of all U.S.
craft beer, 1 percent of all the
beer in America. New Belgium's
distinction, however, as a
business
is that it is entirely
owned by its workers.
Ex-New Yorker Doug Miller has
been at New Belgium for 20
years. Like most Americans,
he had no stake in the firms he
worked for in his early days
back East.
DOUG MILLER, New Belgium
Brewing: It's a job and you're
just coming in and you're
punching
the clock and you're doing your
job. Here, you just do it more
because you're working
for yourself. Like, I don't work
for New Belgium. I am working
for Doug Miller. I am working
for people who work here.
That's the difference.
KIM JORDAN: Beer is malt, and
hops, and yeast, and water.
PAUL SOLMAN: And why did
co-founder and CEO Kim Jordan
sell the company to her workers,
as opposed to a well-heeled
rival or a private financial
firm?
KIM JORDAN: One of things that
we think is a big societal issue
is this widening gap
between the haves and the
have-nots. And we realized that
we had an opportunity to support
people owning something that was
increasing in value. Shared
equity has been an incredibly
powerful engine for us.
CHRIS MACKIN, Worker Ownership
Consultant: New Belgium's a
great example of using this
structure to preserve a legacy.
PAUL SOLMAN: Worker ownership
consultant Chris Mackin, who's
advised New Belgium.
CHRIS MACKIN: For a company like
that to be consumed by a
multinational firm, and to lose
its identity, to lose what's
special about it in order to
make a few extra bucks, that's
not what Kim Jordan
was going to do.
KIM JORDAN: You will notice on
your glass here, see this
lacing? That's actually a sign
of a well-made beer.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, the founder
became a poster child for worker
ownership, initiating an
ESOP, an employee stock
ownership plan, which began
giving stock gradually to its
workers
and ended up in a 100
percent takeover.
CHRIS MACKIN: What she's done
has made it possible to reserve
that independence and
to be able to reward the people
who made her a wealthy woman.
PAUL SOLMAN: Reward them with
shares they sell back to the
company when they retire,
a stock-based pension plan.
ESOPs represent both ownership
and retirement savings, which
is why Congress made them the
only pension plans allowed to
borrow money for funding.
KIM JORDAN: We were so excited
to brew this beer that we
decided to put it on tap today.
PAUL SOLMAN: New Belgium, with a
host of varieties, is now the
eighth largest brewery in
America.
Its fans flow through the
building on tours all the day
long.
KIM JORDAN: How do you pour a
beer? I will show you how. And
then the taps are yours,
OK?
PAUL SOLMAN: The employees seem,
well, pretty juiced themselves.
WOMAN: I feel like I have a
stake in what happens here and
that I have a -- play a part
in making this awesome
place successful, yes.
PAUL SOLMAN: Tiffany Banfield
works in the marketing
department for New Belgium.
WOMAN: So you liked
it where it was?
PAUL SOLMAN: Carrie Weady
(ph) is a graphic designer.
WOMAN: The better I do, the
better we do, and I personally
take that to every day of
my job, and it really does
inspire us all to go above and
beyond in a way that I haven't
experienced at other employers.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, why
doesn't everybody do it?
WOMAN: Because they don't
believe that it is a profitable
model.
PAUL SOLMAN: But it is, Kim
Jordan insists, if management
puts in the effort and is
willing
to empower workers in
a variety of ways.
KIM JORDAN: We're more
profitable than our industry
standards. We have a 3 percent
turnover
rate. And more importantly to us
is our feeling of our engagement
with our co-workers.
WOMAN: Each of those cities
brought some pretty great
incentives to the table.
PAUL SOLMAN: A key feature of
New Belgium's worker engagement:
open-book management, teaching
every employee how
to read the books.
DOUG MILLER: And so they had
classes for us to go to. Like,
we're going to teach you how
to read an income statement, how
to read a balance sheet, how to
understand cash flow,
all those things.
PAUL SOLMAN: The upshot? The
workers know exactly how the
company is doing financially,
and how they are doing as well.
DOUG MILLER: So, I am making
like the same money now that I
was making 20 years ago,
when I was working in the Bronx
in New York City. But I have
more money now. It's just
because I can manage it better.
That's the thing that blows me
away, is that you can
be making $30,000, $40,000,
$50,000 a year and live in a
$300,000 house if you manage
your money well.
Are you operating at a profit
this month? You know, that's
what you got to ask yourself.
PAUL SOLMAN: To Chris Mackin,
who's been pushing worker
ownership since the 1980s, ESOPs
are
a no-brainer, the main and
obvious obstacle, workers don't
have the money to buy their
businesses.
CHRIS MACKIN: For this idea to
go to scale, you have to find
some way in which working
people who don't have assets can
acquire companies that are worth
value.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, Mackin has
started an investment fund that
will allow worker groups to
compete
with private equity firms and
well-heeled competitors when an
owner wants or needs to
sell.
KIM JORDAN: The other beer that
we make is called Felix, and
that's the one that we get
to taste today.
PAUL SOLMAN: Happily for its
workers, New Belgium didn't need
Mackin's money. A bank
ponied up much of the cash to
buy Kim Jordan's stock. She
financed the rest by accepting
IOUs from the company, to be
paid off from future profits.
The risk, that the company
will flounder, meaning lower
pensions for workers and iffy
IOUs for lenders, which suggests
that it might take an unusually
committed owner to make worker
ownership happen.
So, why did Jordan
take the chance?
KIM JORDAN: One of the things
that has been really fun about
business is understanding
that you can chose what you do
with profits. You get this one
life, right? And you get
to think about, what am I going
to do that makes me sort of
joyful and sing? And this
makes me joyful.
PAUL SOLMAN: Fortunately for
her, Kim Jordan's IOUs look like
a pretty safe bet. New Belgium
is slated to open a new
operation in North Carolina in
2016. And since it's only in 38
states thus far, the beer may be
coming soon to a state near you.
KIM JORDAN: And push in now.
PAUL SOLMAN: And it will
stop it right there. OK.
KIM JORDAN: You are very close
to a perfect pour there.
PAUL SOLMAN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," this is economics
correspondent Paul Solman, long
an enthusiast of worker
ownership, but only recently of
the perfect pour.
KIM JORDAN: Cheers.
PAUL SOLMAN: Cheers.
GWEN IFILL: While the U.S.
debate over illegal immigration
rages on, for many Mexicans, the
border dispute represents
a humanitarian crisis.
On a recent trip to Mexico, Fred
de Sam Lazaro met a Catholic
priest who has made it his
mission to protect those who
defy laws to make the journey to
and across the U.S. border.
A version of this story aired on
the PBS program "Religion &
Ethics Newsweekly."
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: In the city
of Saltillo, thousands of rail
cars carry goods made in
Mexico north to the U.S. They
also carry migrants from Central
America on their 1,100-mile
journey
from Mexico's southern border.
In Saltillo, most will hop off
for the final leg of their
journey north, trying to avoid
detection not just by Mexican
and U.S. authorities, but also
criminal gangs. Many will take a
brief respite at Casa del
Migrante, started by 72-year-old
Pedro Pantoja, a Jesuit priest.
The migrants may be violating
the law, but Pantoja says his
primary responsibility is
to be an advocate for people
in poverty and in danger.
REV. PEDRO PANTOJA, Jesuit
Priest (through translator):
Every migrant is a potential
kidnapping victim, and the
criminals extort up to $,5000 in
order to set them free.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: With
pressure and aid from the U.S.
government, Mexican authorities
have been clamping down on
Central American migration and
the number of people making
it as far north as the U.S.
border has dropped
significantly, but they haven't
stopped coming.
REV. PEDRO PANTOJA (through
translator): These guys are
really tired. They just got here
early this morning.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The new
arrivals eluded the Mexican
dragnet which deported 25,000
Central Americans during the
first two months of 2015, twice
the number from a year earlier.
Unaccompanied children,
thousands of whom were reaching
the U.S. in 2014, are now
intercepted
long before they could
get this far north.
I asked why they keep coming.
REV. PEDRO PANTOJA (through
translator): The answer is what
one migrant said to me: "Yes,
I fear organized crime, I fear
the police, but I fear hunger
even more, and violence."
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Many of the
mostly male migrants say they're
fleeing forceable recruitment
into criminal gangs that now
dominate urban life in
Guatemala, Honduras, and El
Salvador,
nations with the world's
highest homicide rates.
REV. PEDRO PANTOJA (through
translator): They have young
gang members on every street
corner,
and they know exactly who lives
in every house, who goes in and
out.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: This
22-year-old, who wanted his
identity concealed to protect
family
back home, escaped El Salvador,
but not Mexican authorities, who
intercepted him on a train
ride with four fellow migrants.
The group wasn't arrested, but
they were instead stripped,
forced into a nearby pond,
and robbed, he told me.
MAN (through translator): They
took all of our money, our
phones, shoes, and they threw
our clothes in the water.
They were laughing at us.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: They found
refuge in a church and were sent
to a shelter.
REV. PEDRO PANTOJA (through
translator): We get the details
of each person. This allows
me to communicate with their
families if they get kidnapped,
if they die, if they end up
in jail or get
lost on the route.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Santos was
being registered on this day.
WOMAN (through translator):
From which country?
SANTOS, Migrant: Honduras.
WOMAN (through translator): And
a telephone number that we can
reach loved ones?
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He's hoping
to return to Texas, where he
worked undocumented for
years before a traffic stop led
to his deportation. He said
returning to the U.S. is much
harder
now because gangs are bigger,
stronger, and more brutal.
SANTOS (through translator): In
the '90s, you could easily
cross. Now they own the river.
If they catch you, they'll beat
you up, even kill you. The only
way now is to find a good
coyote.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Coyotes, or
traffickers, usually tied to
gangs, charge about $4,000,
he says. Others put the price
tag much higher. There's no
guarantee, he says, and no
choice.
SANTOS (through translator): The
situation in Honduras is that
for a 46-year-old, no
one will give you a job in my
line of work, construction. If
you try to start your own
business, no matter how small,
the gangs who would extort any
earnings.
MAVER, Migrant (through
translator): My life was
threatened by the gangs because
I couldn't
afford to pay the extortion.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
Thirty-Six-year-old Maver also
fled Honduras, leaving behind
her small
shop and two older children. She
brought her 3-year-old, Emily,
on a journey that turned
from tiring to terrifying. Emily
was snatched from her by men
posing as good samaritans
who had offered them a ride.
MAVER (through translator): It
was about 3:30 in the morning.
It was really dark. That's
when they came and took my
child. They shoved me to the
ground, took the child, and said
I had to pay $10,000
to get her back.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Sensing her
anguish, Mexican authorities
were sympathetic, she said, as
were many strangers. In the end,
Emily was found in the custody
of child protection authorities,
apparently turned over
by her kidnappers.
MAVER (through translator): The
moment I lifted her up was the
happiest moment of my life,
to hug her, to know she was
alive. Emily told me she was
very scared, kept saying, "Why
did you leave me to travel by
myself? Why did you leave me
alone?"
Now every time I hug her, I
tell her she's not alone.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Other
migrants say, the threat of
crime aside, the journey is
dangerous,
getting a foot jammed between
train cars, for example. That's
what happened to 50-year-old
Laura.
LAURA, Migrant (through
translator): I thought I was
going to die, and all I kept
thinking
was, let me die in a town so
they'll be able to identify me
and take me back to my family.
And then I saw a man and shouted
for him, and he called the Red
Cross.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: After three
days in the hospital, she was
brought to the shelter.
She will wait several months for
a prosthesis and rehab. After
that she plans to continue
her journey north.
LAURA (through translator): I
know it will be more difficult,
but what else can I do?
I have to support a family, not
just my daughter, but I have
grandchildren. They don't even
have a place to live.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: She can stay
here for as long as she needs.
There are some 60 shelters
along the migrant route in
Mexico, most run by Catholic
individuals and groups. Only
this
one has no time limit.
REV. PEDRO PANTOJA (through
translator): All people who come
here injured or hurt, they
do not leave here until they're
completely recovered. They have
to leave here as persons
who are free and with dignity.
In Genesis Chapter 12, God
called Abraham to be a migrant.
In reality, we are all migrants.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: For the
migrants here, the shelter helps
where it can for the onward
journey. It helped Maver and
Emily get humanitarian visas to
legally be in Mexico. That will
allow
them to make a much safer bus
journey to Texas, where they
will seek asylum.
That's not an option for Santos,
who is preparing for the
perilous hike to the U.S.
border.
His main task, finding a
trafficker with both a good
track record getting people
across
and one willing to take most of
the payment once he's safely in
the U.S.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam Lazaro in Saltillo,
Mexico.
GWEN IFILL: Fred's reporting is
a partnership with the
Under-Told Stories Project at
Saint
Mary's University of Minnesota.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, some seven
years after the housing crisis,
a look at what happened,
how well the government fix
worked, and where are we now.
All of that can be found in the
newest addition to the
"NewsHour" Bookshelf.
Jeffrey Brown has
our conversation.
JEFFREY BROWN: In the world of
Fannie and Freddie, strange is
actually normal. That's
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, a
little understood, but hugely
important mortgage lending
institutions.
And the line about how strange
they are comes from a new book
titled "Shaky Ground" that
explores their role during and
since the 2008 financial
meltdown.
Author Bethany McLean, a
contributing writer for "Vanity
Fair," joins me now.
And welcome to you.
I think we have to start by
reminding people what these
institutions do, because they
play
very important roles.
BETHANY MCLEAN, Author, "Shaky
Ground": And they're part of the
hidden machinery of our
world, this critically important
stuff in the background that is
-- that makes up part
of our existence, the lives of
almost every American, but we
don't realize it until there's
a problem.
Fannie Mae was created in the
wake of the Great Depression.
The idea was that if lenders
could sell their loans, if banks
and other primary lenders could
make a mortgage and
then sell it to another
institution, they'd be more
inclined to make that loan. And
that
would help even out the flow of
mortgage credit and thus
increase the availability of
homeownership
in this great, disparate,
diverse nation of ours.
And that happened.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, the old
mystery for many people is, what
are they? What are they doing?
The latest, the new mystery
you're writing about is, why are
they still with us, right,
after what happened? Tell us,
remind us sort of what happened
during the meltdown.
BETHANY MCLEAN: So, in the 2008
financial crisis, the fear was
that Fannie and Freddie
would go bankrupt. The
securities they create which are
backed by Americans' home
mortgages
are -- they're immense. There
are over $5 trillion of them
outstanding, and they move
through the global financial
system like water.
So, the fear was that if these
two companies melted down, they
would take the global financial
system with them. So, the U.S.
government put them in a state
known as conservatorship,
where they were backed,
supported by a line of credit
from the U.S. Treasury and
managed,
effectively, by a
government agency.
And the idea was, the silver
lining in the financial crisis
was, we're going to rethink
how we finance homeownership.
We're going to -- there's got to
be a better...
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: A
silver lining, right.
BETHANY MCLEAN: A silver lining.
We're going to come up with a
better way to do this. This
thing called conservatorship
was supposed to be temporary.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, because, I
mean, these things are -- we
often refer to as
quasi-governmental,
but what it came to look in, I
guess, reality is that the
private sector had the upside,
where the public sector, the
rest of us, had the risk.
BETHANY MCLEAN: The big source
of controversy about these
companies, President Obama
actually
said it in a speech he gave
recently, saying these two
companies had to be abolished,
because
it was, heads they win,
tails, taxpayers lose.
And what he meant by that was
that, in good times, executives
and shareholders of these
companies would make money, but,
in bad times, taxpayers would be
left holding the bag. And
that is sort of how
it panned out.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so, you
said -- as you said, they're in
conservatorship. There is
an ongoing fight. We cover it
here occasionally as something
bubbles up, ongoing fight over
what to do with it.
BETHANY MCLEAN: What to do.
And it's a huge question. It's
one that's important to every
American's lives. If you
have a mortgage, the
availability of mortgage credit
helps dictate the terms on which
you
get your mortgage. It's a
critical component in home
prices, which are the major
assets
that most Americans have.
Even if you don't have a
mortgage, these $5 trillion of
securities are out there, and
they matter for every part of
the global financial market. So,
it's this critical, big issue,
and we're not talking about it.
The companies sit in limbo seven
years after the financial
crisis, and nobody seems
to know what to do.
JEFFREY BROWN: And it involves
very big players. This is what
you were kind of look -- digging
into it, because the investors
in it are major hedge funds,
foreign governments, including
China and Japan. So, there's a
lot of consequences for what
happens or doesn't happen.
BETHANY MCLEAN: The consequences
are huge to average homebuyers,
to investors everywhere.
And you have this huge fight,
indeed, and almost paralysis,
because the government doesn't
know what to do. The two
companies are intensely
controversial.
And investors who bought the
remaining Fannie and Freddie
securities are now agitating for
-- to get paid. So, you have all
these different very powerful
people fighting over the outcome
of these two companies.
JEFFREY BROWN: And if it were to
be abolished, which is a -- if
they were to be abolished,
which is possible, there is
still that argument about the
historic role where you started
about allowing affordable
housing for so many people.
BETHANY MCLEAN: Right.
I don't think they will be
abolished, and I have actually
come to the point of view
that I'm not sure they should
be. In the wake of the financial
crisis, were it not for Fannie
and Freddie, the mortgage market
would have completely shut down.
You can no longer say that these
two companies are unnecessary. I
think -- I think it's -- I
think that's part of the
problem. Many people believe
that without Fannie and Freddie,
the
30-year-fixed rate, fully
pre-payable mortgage, which is
this fixture of American life --
I
think over 80 percent of the
people who got a mortgage in the
last six months took out
this kind of mortgage -- without
Fannie or Freddie or some kind
of government backstop,
this type of mortgage
wouldn't exist.
It would be a radically
different housing market. Are we
prepared for that? I don't
know.
JEFFREY BROWN: You have written
about Enron. You looked at the
financial crisis. When you
looked at these two
institutions, even as somebody
who is used to looking at this
kind
of thing, were there surprises?
BETHANY MCLEAN: I think it's --
I think it's incredibly
surprising. I think it's really
weird that you have this most
domestic of assets possible, a
home, financed by foreign
central banks, a home in
Kansas that was financed by...
(CROSSTALK)
BETHANY MCLEAN: ... in China.
JEFFREY BROWN: We just don't
think about it, right, as we're
thinking about that loan.
BETHANY MCLEAN: We just don't
think about it, the fact that,
since the financial crisis,
the hue and cry has been, more
capital, give banks more capital
and the financial system
will be safer.
Fannie and Freddie, with their
over $5 trillion of securities
outstanding, are operating on
next to no capital. If there is
a sudden shock to the system, if
interest rates go up, if
they suffer a loss, taxpayers
will have to foot the bill
again. And yet...
JEFFREY BROWN: So, that
risk is still there.
BETHANY MCLEAN: That risk is
still there, and is a total
example of government
dysfunction,
that we have had seven years to
figure out this problem, and we
have done nothing.
JEFFREY BROWN: And do you --
and, briefly, do you expect some
resolution? You're laughing
as I say it. It sounds like no.
BETHANY MCLEAN: I'm
laughing as you say it.
There is a big fight over this
notion, should we have the
government in the housing market
or not? Should we just get the
government out and let private
capital, if you consider
big banks to be private capital,
finance the housing market? What
would the mortgage market
look like without that? And how
do we -- how do we move forward?
And the investors, the big hedge
funds who have taken stakes in
Fannie and Freddie, are
-- have points of view on this,
too, and are big players in the
debate.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, "Shaky
Ground: The Strange Saga of the
U.S. Mortgage Giants.
Bethany McLean,
thank you so much.
BETHANY MCLEAN:
Thank you so much.
GWEN IFILL: Violence in urban
areas is nothing new, but one
doesn't have to be targeted to
become the victim of gun
violence. Two years ago, 11 year
old Tayloni Mazyck was shot and
paralyzed by a stray bullet near
her home in Brooklyn, New York.
Filmmaker Shiho Fukada followed
Tayloni's recovery, focused --
focusing on how her devoted
mother, a single parent,
coped with the tragedy.
The result was a New York
Times film, "Stray Bullet."
PRISCILLA SAMUEL, Mother of
Tayloni Mazyck: When she had
dreams about her being shot,
or when she hears loud noises,
she gets panic attacks.
I have run up in there and her
heart be racing. She was like:
"I can't deal with this. I can't
do this. I can't do this."
Then she starts saying, "I
should have ducked down and laid
on the floor." She keeps saying
what she should have did, what
she should have did, what she
should have did.
He's 17 years old. His life is
over. Just like my life is over,
her life is, his life
is over, too.
But I can't hold all that,
because I got enough going on.
So, I have to be able to
function
and do what I got to do for her,
and by me holding that
resentment is going to stop me
from moving forward.
TAYLONI MAZYCK, Gun Violence
Victim: Got to wash my hair.
PRISCILLA SAMUEL: We have
got to wash that, too.
And I get a little depressed
because it's like I don't even
have a life. She's my daughter,
my husband and everything all in
one. I have to do everything.
Mostly everything is on
me.
Don't -- don't move.
And that puts a toll on me,
because Tayloni doesn't let me
breathe.
You just complain
about everything.
TAYLONI MAZYCK: Because it
hurts. What else you want me to
say? Ooh, that felt good?
PRISCILLA SAMUEL: How do washing
your face -- how does washing
your face hurt?
TAYLONI MAZYCK: You was washing
my neck, and that hurts.
PRISCILLA SAMUEL: OK. All right.
Tayloni gets very frustrated
because she can't just get up
and do it herself.
TAYLONI MAZYCK: Mommy, hurry up.
PRISCILLA SAMUEL: Everything is,
"Mommy, mommy, mommy."
Sometimes, I hear her calling me
in
my sleep, and she
don't be calling me.
AL SHARPTON, Civil Rights
Activist: What do we want?
AUDIENCE: Justice!
AL SHARPTON: What do we want?
AL SHARPTON: When do we want it?
AUDIENCE: Now!
AL SHARPTON: We rally against
violence in our community. We
have this morning two young
people that this organization
stood with, and we're glad that
they are here to be with
us, Tayloni, who was shot in
Brooklyn and paralyzed. Tayloni,
she's here today.
Bring her up.
(APPLAUSE)
AL SHARPTON: You made it
through. Here's our gun violence
for you.
(SINGING)
TAYLONI MAZYCK: Jerry (ph), why
are you in my room? Go away.
PRISCILLA SAMUEL: You better
stop, because, one day, it might
be him doing this.
(CROSSTALK)
PRISCILLA SAMUEL:
So, you never know.
TAYLONI MAZYCK: I'm be
walking by that time.
PRISCILLA SAMUEL: I encourage
her to walk again. You believe
you can walk, then ask
God to help you walk again, and
you're going to walk again.
That's it, because nobody else
can tell you different.
TAYLONI MAZYCK: Please.
Jerry, I'm going to walk. I'm
going to walk before that. When
I walk, that means I'm going
to run, so I can catch you.
PRISCILLA SAMUEL: I'm just glad
she's still here. That's all I
got to say.
(LAUGHTER)
PRISCILLA SAMUEL: She says she
wants to be a doctor or a
lawyer. I want her to be the
best that she can be.
That's what she has to do.
GWEN IFILL: You can watch more
New York Times documentary on
their Web site, newyorktimes
-- nytimes.com.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And a news
update before we go.
Republican Congressman Paul Ryan
of Wisconsin has formally
declared his candidacy for the
speaker of the House of
Representatives. In a letter to
colleagues, he said -- quote --
"Now
we have an opportunity to turn
the page, to start with a clean
slate." The vote will take
place next week.
GWEN IFILL: And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight. I'm Gwen
Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow evening with Mark
Shields and David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you, and good
night.